# USA - Utah

Utah has some negative laws towards trans people. However,
these laws are, thus far, fairly restricted and do not apply to most
trans travelers in most situations.

That said, HB257, as passed by the legislature but awaiting governor
signature, will legally define sex according to sex assigned at birth,
contains restrictions on changing room usage, and may subject trans
people to harassment in restrooms.

Utah does ban trans care for children which has an unknown impact on
child custody, however parents are not penalized under this law (it
applies to healthcare providers).

Note that indigenous nations may have laws differing from Utah's
and may lack some protections.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Utah non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people in public
   accommodations (it does include LGBT people in employment and
   housing).
 * HB257, if signed by the governor, mandates government discrimiantion
   against trans people, both by defining sex by sex assigned at birth
   and restricting changing room usage by trans people in government
   owned or controlled facilities.

## Public Accommodations

 * Utah has wide-reaching religious freedom laws that allow denial of
   many services on the basis of gender identity.
 * HB257, if signed by the governor, mandates government discrimiantion
   against trans people, both by defining sex by sex assigned at birth
   and restricting changing room usage by trans people in government
   owned or controlled facilities.  Trans people would be required to
   use changing rooms in publicly owned or controlled facilities in
   accordance with sex assigned at birth unless they update their birth
   certificate's gender marker to a new binary marker AND have had
   unambiguous binary bottom surgery in line with stereotypes for the
   new gender marker.
 * HB257, if signed by the governor, would require trans people to use
   bathrooms according to sex assigned at birth within K12 schools.
 * HB257, if signed by the governor, would seem to allow trans people
   who have BOTH updated their birth certificate and had bottom surgery
   to conform with binary stereotypes may then use either changing room
   in publicly owned facilities.  This is because a person can use a
   changing room in line with their sex (defined as sex assigned at
   birth) OR the other binary sex if their birth certificate and
   post-surgical genitals match the other binary sex.
 * HB257 would have no impact on facility usage by intersex people.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Drag performance and cross-dressing is legal in Utah
 * However, at least one city (St. George) is using an obscure city
   ordinance to block permits for a drag event. This is being challenged
   in court, with a [preliminary
   injunction](https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.utd.139943/gov.uscourts.utd.139943.63.0.pdf)
   granted to allow drag to proceed in public spaces.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women are typically be housed with men. This would be required
   under HB257, if signed by the governor.
 * Trans men are typically be housed with women. This would be required
   under HB257, if signed by the governor.
 * Nonbinary people would typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth. This would be required under HB257, if signed by
   the governor.

## Legal Definition of Sex

Non-binary people are recognized in limited ways.

Some laws specify male, female, and similar words based on sex assigned
at birth, gametes, and/or chromosomes.  HB257 would extend this to
additional laws, if signed by the governor.

Utah allows gender marker changes on IDs in some circumstances.  It is
unknown how HB257 may impact this, if signed by the governor.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults
 * Trans medical care (other than therapy) is not legal for people under 18.
   However, parents are not criminalized (the law applies to medical
   providers). While the law itself does allow for the possibility of
   hormone treatment of trans youth, in theory, the provisions are
   extremely restrictive and place doctors at extreme financial risk,
   resulting in this making it effectively a ban as any Utah provider would be
   willing to take the risk of prescribing HRT or puberty blockers to
   trans youth.

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Transition care is not specifically defined as child abuse, however
   puberty blockers, hormones, and surgery are banned.
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 * Child welfare agencies are covered by a law that allows them to
   refuse services for religious reasons.
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized.
 * Within the Navajo Nation, the Diné Marriage Act prohibits recognition
   of same-sex marriage. It is unknown how the "sex" of trans people
   would be seen under this law, potentially placing all trans/cis
   marriages at risk (straight or queer) as well as most queer
   marriages.

## Relevant Laws

 * [2023 SB0016 - Trans Youth Healthcare Ban](https://legiscan.com/UT/text/SB0016/id/2668336)
 * [Diné Marriage Act (Applicable in the Navajo Nation)](https://courts.navajo-nsn.gov/Resolutions/29-05%20Marriage%20Act.pdf)
 * [2024 HB257 - Changing Room Ban, Definition of Sex (Not yet law, awaiting governor signature)](https://le.utah.gov/~2024/bills/static/HB0257.html)

## General Safety

HB257, if signed by the governor, would immediately go into effect. This
could occur at any time now that HB257 has been passed by the
legislature.  Any traveler should use extreme caution if they are not
both cis and have a very stereotypical gender presentation, if they use
any changing room in a government owned or controlled facility that is
open to the public, such as public parks, pools, sports facilities,
recreation centers, universities, etc.  A person may be arrested for
suspicion of violating this law and be required to produce either their
original birth certificate or amended birth certificate plus evidence of
bottom surgery, for presentation in court at a trial, if arrested.
While this is not legal advice, simply telling a police officer your sex
assigned at birth matches the facility or your usage of the exception
for trans people with updated birth certificate and bottom surgery.

Because of HB257, and the widespread press coverage, extreme caution
should be used in all changing facilities and bathrooms for anyone that
is not unambiguously presenting following stereotypes of their sex
assigned at birth. This applies not just to trans people, but to anyone
else who does not follow gender expression stereotypes (such as cis
women with facial hair or short hair, men with gynecomastia, etc).

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

 * [Southern Utah Drag Stars v. City of St. George (challenge to St.  George drag permit ban)](https://www.acluutah.org/en/cases/southern-utah-drag-stars-v-city-st-george)

